clustering/README.md, before:

# Clustering
Clustering is a popular exploratory data analysis method that allows analysts to study their datasets at a higher level of abstraction.
Here we use [*k*-means](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K-means_clustering) to identify regions with similar phenology (i.e. *phenoregions*).
Different kind of *phenoregions* are defined based from the leaf and bloom indices (products of the extended spring indices), and the AVHRR SOST phenological metric. In the near future we will create phenoregions from other indices/metrics and from the combination of both.

The optimal *k* value was identified by the ”elbow” of the [Within Cluster Sum of Squared Error (WCSSE) graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Determining_the_number_of_clusters_in_a_data_set).

*Phenoregions* were obtained by applying *k*-means to a matrix with as many rows as valid gridcells in CONUS, and as many columns as years in the database. The SCALA/Python code was embedded in [Jupyter notebooks](https://github.com/phenology/infrastructure/tree/applications/applications/notebooks/stable) and run in a SPARK cluster.

A brief overview of the existing notebooks is as follows:  

Notebook | Brief description 
--- | --- 
[*k*-means_model](https://github.com/phenology/infrastructure/blob/applications/applications/notebooks/stable/kmeans_model.ipynb) | For the extended spring indices: Loads geotiffs, creates data matrix, runs *k*-means, calculates WCSSE  
[*k*-means_satellite](https://github.com/phenology/infrastructure/blob/applications/applications/notebooks/stable/kmeans_satellite.ipynb) | same than above but for the AVHRR data
[kmeans_wssse](https://github.com/phenology/infrastructure/blob/applications/applications/notebooks/stable/kmeans_wssse.ipynb) | To read and plot WCSE (or WSSE) values 
[create_wssse_csv](https://github.com/phenology/infrastructure/blob/applications/applications/notebooks/stable/create_wssse_csv.ipynb) | To load an Array of triples stored as objectFile and save it again as a CSV file
[plot_kmeans_clusters](https://github.com/phenology/infrastructure/blob/applications/applications/notebooks/stable/plot_kmeans_clusters.ipynb)| To plot the GeoTiffs created out of kmeans. Such GeoTiffs contain the cluster IDs
[plot_kmeans_clusters-Light](https://github.com/phenology/infrastructure/blob/applications/applications/notebooks/stable/plot_kmeans_clusters-Light.ipynb)|light version of previous notebook. 

# Correlation
The ecological meaning of land surface phenological metrics is not fully clear yet. To shed light on this, we performed a spatio-temporal correlation analysis between the Leaf and Bloom indices and the SOS metric. The first step in the correlation analysis was to deal with the negative values in the AVHRR SOS metric.

From the metadata of the AVHRR phenology products: 
> The SOST units indicate the day of the year when positive; negative values indicate a SOST day in the previous year (for example, a SOST value of -10 for 2002 indicates a start of season day of 355 in 2001). Valid values range from -150 to 365. In the SOST data layer, a cell value of 1000 represents water bodies and a cell value of -1000 represents the area where a SOST could not be detected due to insufficient change in time-series NDVI or due to lack of sufficient input data

Thus, we first transformed the negative numbers [-150,0) to positive numbers representing the day of year (of year -1)
Then we calculated the per pixel Pearson correlation between each of hte spring indices and the AVHRR SOS value.
Interestingly, we saw areas with moderate to high negative correlation. These areas correspond to locations where phenology seems to be driven by other environmental factors (e.g. water), and to areas where the SOS happens in the second half of the year (i.e. cells with negative values in the original AVHRR SOS product).

# Output
- Extended abstract submitted to [ESA's big data from space 2017 conference](http://www.bigdatafromspace2017.org/)
- A manuscript for the [Springer's Journal of big data](https://journalofbigdata.springeropen.com/) is in the making

Commit message:

added reference to correlation notebook

clustering/README.md, after:

# Clustering
Clustering is a popular exploratory data analysis method that allows analysts to study their datasets at a higher level of abstraction.
Here we use [*k*-means](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/K-means_clustering) to identify regions with similar phenology (i.e. *phenoregions*).
Different kind of *phenoregions* are defined based from the leaf and bloom indices (products of the extended spring indices), and the AVHRR SOST phenological metric. In the near future we will create phenoregions from other indices/metrics and from the combination of both.

The optimal *k* value was identified by the ”elbow” of the [Within Cluster Sum of Squared Error (WCSSE) graph](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Determining_the_number_of_clusters_in_a_data_set).

*Phenoregions* were obtained by applying *k*-means to a matrix with as many rows as valid gridcells in CONUS, and as many columns as years in the database. The SCALA/Python code was embedded in [Jupyter notebooks](https://github.com/phenology/infrastructure/tree/applications/applications/notebooks/stable) and run in a SPARK cluster.

A brief overview of the existing notebooks is as follows:  

Notebook | Brief description 
--- | --- 
[*k*-means_model](https://github.com/phenology/infrastructure/blob/applications/applications/notebooks/stable/kmeans_model.ipynb) | For the extended spring indices: Loads geotiffs, creates data matrix, runs *k*-means, calculates WCSSE  
[*k*-means_satellite](https://github.com/phenology/infrastructure/blob/applications/applications/notebooks/stable/kmeans_satellite.ipynb) | same than above but for the AVHRR data
[kmeans_wssse](https://github.com/phenology/infrastructure/blob/applications/applications/notebooks/stable/kmeans_wssse.ipynb) | To read and plot WCSE (or WSSE) values 
[create_wssse_csv](https://github.com/phenology/infrastructure/blob/applications/applications/notebooks/stable/create_wssse_csv.ipynb) | To load an Array of triples stored as objectFile and save it again as a CSV file
[plot_kmeans_clusters](https://github.com/phenology/infrastructure/blob/applications/applications/notebooks/stable/plot_kmeans_clusters.ipynb)| To plot the GeoTiffs created out of kmeans. Such GeoTiffs contain the cluster IDs
[plot_kmeans_clusters-Light](https://github.com/phenology/infrastructure/blob/applications/applications/notebooks/stable/plot_kmeans_clusters-Light.ipynb)|light version of previous notebook. 
[satellite_model_corr_len_neg](https://github.com/phenology/infrastructure/blob/applications/applications/notebooks/stable/satellite_model_corr_len_neg.ipynb) | To calculate the correlation between spring indices and AVHRR SOS (loaded from Geotiffs)

# Correlation
The ecological meaning of land surface phenological metrics is not fully clear yet. To shed light on this, we performed a spatio-temporal correlation analysis between the Leaf and Bloom indices and the SOS metric. The first step in the correlation analysis was to deal with the negative values in the AVHRR SOS metric.

From the metadata of the AVHRR phenology products: 
> The SOST units indicate the day of the year when positive; negative values indicate a SOST day in the previous year (for example, a SOST value of -10 for 2002 indicates a start of season day of 355 in 2001). Valid values range from -150 to 365. In the SOST data layer, a cell value of 1000 represents water bodies and a cell value of -1000 represents the area where a SOST could nott be detected due to insufficient change in time-series NDVI or due to lack of sufficient input data

Thus, we first transformed the negative numbers [-150,0) to positive numbers representing the day of year (of year -1)
Then we calculated the per pixel Pearson correlation between each of hte spring indices and the AVHRR SOS value.
Interestingly, we saw areas with moderate to high negative correlation. These areas correspond to locations where phenology seems to be driven by other environmental factors (e.g. water), and to areas where the SOS happens in the second half of the year (i.e. cells with negative values in the original AVHRR SOS product).

# Output
- Extended abstract submitted to [ESA's big data from space 2017 conference](http://www.bigdatafromspace2017.org/)
- A manuscript for the [Springer's Journal of big data](https://journalofbigdata.springeropen.com/) is in the making
